# Troubleshooting Printers - CompTIA A+ 220-1201 - 5.6
Source: [Troubleshooting Printers - CompTIA A+ 220-1201 - 5.6 - Professor Messer](https://youtu.be/_BhO_nYod0o?si=7fx2Lk9vjDZunzWn)

## Testing the printer
- **Print or scan a test page**
	- Built into Windows
		- Using the operating system and the device driver as it's currently configured
	- Not the printer's application
	- You can test printing from the printer itself
		- Tests from the printer's own hardware
- **Use diagnostic tools**
	- Web-based utilities built into the printer
	- Vendor/ Manufacturer specific
	- Generic utilities

### Testing your printer's connectivity and functionality
- Print a test page directly from the printer's control panel.
	- *If the test page prints successfully*, the issue is most likely due to your device's connection, not the printer itself.
		- In this case, double-check the cables, network settings, and other configurations to ensure everything is correctly set up.[^dion]

## Bad output
- **Lines down the printed page**
	- Inkjet: Simply clean the print heads
	- Laser: Check for scratched photosensitive drum inside the printer

- **Faded prints, blank pages**
	- Low toner or ink

- Double/ echo images or speckling
	- The laser printer's optical drum was not cleaned properly
	- Ghost or "shadow" from previous drum rotation

## Garbled print
- **Bad printer driver/ wrong model**
	- Incorrect page description language (PCL or PostScript?)
- **Verify the printer functionality**
	- Check with a test page
- **Bad application**
	- If the printer and Windows driver are working correctly, it could be the application sending bad information to the printer.
	- Check the output
	- Try a different app or upgrade the application

## Paper jam
- **Careful when removing**
	- Don't rip the paper
	- Don't damage internal components
	- Some printers release their mechanisms when you open the top, making it easier to remove the paper.

- **Paper not feeding or misfeeds multiple pages**
	- This issue may be caused by either the paper tray or the pickup rollers.
	- Check the tray
	- Pickup rollers are part of a laser printer maintenance kit

- **Creased paper**
	- Problems in the paper path as it's moving through the printer
	- Check the paper weight to see if it is compatible with the printer or if it's recommended by the printer manufacturer

## Multiple prints are pending in the queue
- Corrupted print jobs
	- The printer spooler will crash or freeze
	- Most spooler configurations will automatically restart
	- The printer spooler is a middle point between the application and the printer.
		- The application sends a print job to the spooler,
		- And the spooler is responsible for then sending that print job to the printer.

- Problems are logged 
	- Windows Event Viewer, Windows-PrintService
		- See if any of the corruptions or any other problems with the print spooler are occurring.
- **One job may be causing the issue**
	- Monitor the queue for details
	- You can clear everything else on the print job queuing list, and then troubleshoot that specific print job

### Print Queue issues 
- **List of print jobs waiting to be processed by the printer.**

- Sometimes a print job will get stuck in the queue, causing the entire queue to freeze, preventing the printer from processing any other jobs.
- A **frozen print queue** can happen for several different reasons:
	1. Corrupted print job
	2. Loss of connection
	3. Software glitch
- No new print jobs will be processed until this issue is resolved.
- To resolve the **frozen print queue** issue:
	- *Clear the queue manually*
		- This can be done via printer settings or the printer's properties window inside your operating system.
			- On Windows, you would find your printer within the *Devices and Printer* section, right-click on it, and select the "See what's printing" option. Your print queue will open from there, where you can cancel the stuck print jobs manually or clear out all the jobs.
	- *Restart the printer spooler service*
		- The **print spooler service** is a software service that manages all of your print jobs.
		- On Windows, you can restart this by going to the *Services* window, finding the printer spooler service, right-clicking on it, and selecting "Restart".
		- This will stop and restart the spooler, which should clear up any issues with the queue.
	- *Updating or reinstalling the printer drivers.*
		-  A frozen print queue may be caused by an underlying software issue or outdated printer drivers.
		- You may find the updated drivers for your printer on the printer manufacturer's website.[^dion]


## Grinding noises
- **Never a good sound from your printer**
	- The ink is already manufactured
	- Ink cartridges may need to be reseated properly
- **Something is not operating properly**
	- Paper jam
	- The carriage is stalled or jammed
- **Each printer has a different process**
	- Check the manuals for removing paper jams
	- Some inkjet printers have a particular process
- **May require additional maintenance**
	- Worst-case scenario: replace the entire printer

## Finishing issues
- **Finishing happens after the ink or toner has been applied**
	- Collate, binding, stapling, and performing an additional task once the output has been created.
- **Staple jams**
	- Larger printers will collate and staple groups of printers
	- Remove the staple to continue the process
		- Each printer manufacturer has a different removal process
- **Incorrect hole punch location**
	- If the holes are not lining up the way you expected them to be:
		- Verify with the printer driver
		- May require a driver update

## Incorrect page orientation
- **Print a portrait page**
	- Getting a landscape print, possibly caused by a mismatch along the line
- **Check the settings when printing**
	- Controlled by the print driver
	- May require a driver update
	- Also check the default configurations for the print driver and the settings you've configured to send out when choosing to print from your application.
- **The print also has a default setting**
	- Check the settings on the printer console
	- If the print driver is not telling the printer the correct orientation, you may be able to configure it from the printer itself.
	- Printers that have a default setting for orientation may affect all of the subsequent output from those devices.

## Tray not recognized
- **Office printers often have multiple paper trays**
	- Plain letters, plain legal, letterhead, paper colors, etc.
- **The size of the printed page needs to match the size of the paper in the tray**
	- You can't print a 14" legal page to an 11" letter page
	- You need to make sure the paper tray you're using matches the size of the paper associated with the output.

- The definition of the paper tray is part of th- **driver configuration**
	- Compare the user's configuration with the installed paper trays
	- A network administrator would need to confirm that the list of paper trays visible on the print driver matches the trays that are physically installed on the printer.
		- If there is a mismatch, the printer may indicate it on its screen, instructing the user to load the appropriate page for the particular output.

## Connectivity issues
- **The printer is a network device**
	- Follows the same rules as any other device
	- When troubleshooting corporate printers, you also need to be good at troubleshooting networks.
		- Printers tend to be connected to wired or wireless networks.
		- You would likely perform the same network troubleshooting methodology as any other device on the network.
- **Confirm the connection type**
	- Wired, wireless, etc.
		- It will help you know whether you're troubleshooting a problem with the cable or an interference on the wireless network.
- **Verify IP address configurations**
	- IP, subnet mask, default gateway, DNS, and any other important network configuration settings.
- **Check the print server**
	- Maybe part of the printer.
		- You want to check if the print server inside of the printer is working properly.
	- Most printers have their own print server, with a management frontend.
	- Also look for *link lights*, which are usually located around the ports of the printer
		- If it has an active link
		- If it is sending and receiving data

### The operating system is not detecting a locally attached printer
- **Checking if the Printer has an 'Online' or 'Offline' status**
	- If the printer is locally connected to the computer via USB, the operating system should automatically detect it.
	- If not:
		- Verify the printer is switched on and in an *online* state.
		- If it's in *offline* mode, the printer will refuse to accept any print jobs.
			- Offline mode may also indicate that the printer may be:
				- out of paper
				- detecting a feed error
				- receiving a corrupted print job
		- Make sure to follow the error messages on your printer in order to troubleshoot any of the issues before the printer can be brought back into online mode.
- **Ensure that the USB cable connecting the printer to the computer is properly seated**
	- Make sure both ends of the **USB cable** are securely connected to both the printer and the computer.
	- If the USB connection is correct, but the printer still cannot be detected on the computer:
		- Rule out a faulty USB cable by replacing it with a new one.
		- Test the printer using a different **USB port** on the computer.
			- Sometimes a bad USB port could be the culprit.[^dion]

### Network connectivity issues
- **Most modern printers can connect either via USB or through network connections**
	- If multiple USB cables and ports don't work, the port connection on the printer itself is likely malfunctioning.
		- You may need to switch to a different connection method, such as **wireless** or **wired network** connections.
	- Most modern printers can connect either via USB or through a network connection, like a wired Ethernet or wireless Wi-Fi connection.
	- If your printer has a built-in **print server**, it may have an RJ45 Ethernet jack on its back panel.
		- This allows the printer to be accessed from anywhere on the network, instead of coming from a singular workstation.
		- Many printers also now come with wireless print servers, which enable them to connect to your Wi-Fi network, allowing all of the devices on that same wireless network to send print jobs to the printer wirelessly.
	- If your printer isn't connecting to the network:
		- It could be a failure to obtain a DHCP address from your network's DHCP server
			- To resolve this, you can manually assign a static IP address to the printer, along with the subnet mask, gateway, and DNS server information, similarly with any other network connected device.
		- Weak wireless signals from wireless printers can also cause connectivity issues.
	- *If the printer is too far from the wireless access point or router, it may struggle to maintain a strong connection*
		- You want to ensure the printer is joining the correct network by inputting the appropriate SSID and password.[^dion]

### Power cycling the printer
- **Power Cycling** involves turning the printer off, waiting for about 10 seconds, and then turning it back on.
- This process clears the printer's memory and allows it to reload its settings.
	- This often resolves the connectivity problems.
- *If power cycling doesn't solve this issue*, consider doing a factory reset to restore the printer to its default settings.
	- This often resolves more persistent connectivity issues, allowing you to reconfigure the printer from scratch, just as if you were installing a brand new device.[^dion]


## Summary
### Three main types to troubleshoot:
- Local connections, such as those using USB
- Network connections, including Ethernet and Wi-Fi
- Issues related to a frozen print queue
### Ensure that:
- The printer is online
- Properly cabled
- Correctly configured
### When all else fails:
- Try power cycling the printer, or
- restore it to its factory settings
[^dion]


---
#Core1 #Troubleshooting #Printers 

[^dion]: Source: [CompTIA A+ Core 1 (220-1201) Course by Jason Dion - Udemy](https://www.udemy.com/course/comptia-a-core-1/)